[Sandi] To think we've had two weeks
in tent. Here we are, week three.
Two bakers gone. Now just ten remain.
Grand times.
I don't know why I'm doing
the voice in your head.
I can't do the accent.
It keeps coming out a bit Indian.
Well, go to the top of our stairs.
You're here now, lad.
Might as well do this.
[Noel] It's bread week.
-What could go wrong?
-Ooh!
They'll be taking on
a signature teatime classic.
Ah! They've sunk.
Getting stuck into the technical.
Two fingers. I just know how Paul does it.
-And going all out...
-[exhales]
-...to attempt...
-I've never baked a dragon before.
...the toughest bread sculpture
challenge ever set in the tent.
I feel like you're trying to psych me out.
[theme music playing]
I quite like this, actually.
They might stick with it,
go up the path and have a bath.
Really suits you.
What about you?
Could you pretend to be well-bred?
Actually, I am well-bred.
I just pretend to be a street urchin.
You know, give me a bit of an edge.
Check this out.
Toodle pip, everyone,
and welcome to bread week.
[birds chirping]
This is probably the week I've been
dreading. Bread's not my forte.
I love bread and I can't wait
to get on with it.
[Flo] I've been making bread
for about 40 years.
I've said that now,
I hope they turn out good today.
I love bread, but I make it for my family.
I don't make it for Mr. Paul Hollywood.
[Steven] I hope I haven't peaked,
because I really would like Star Baker
again. It's kind of addictive.
Morning, lovely bakers.
Welcome to bread week.
Today, Prue and Paul
would like you to make twelve teacakes.
[Sandi] Your teacakes need to be round,
they need to be identical,
made with an enriched dough,
and your fruit of choice
needs to be evenly distributed.
You can serve them with accompaniments.
Maybe a jazz singer?
Yeah, that'd be nice.
Or just jam is fine, too.
You've got 2 hours, 45 minutes.
-On your marks...
-Get set.
-Bake!
This is the biggest week for me.
It's my chance
to show them that I can bake bread.
Still a bit nervous.
I'm not a great one for bread week.
I don't bake a lot of bread at home.
Fingers crossed.
I've tried these quite a lot,
so everyone at home is absolutely
sick of teacakes.
[Sandi] Teacakes are made from an enriched
dough, which contains extra fats, eggs,
sugars and fruit,
all of which can inhibit the yeast,
preventing the all-important rise.
With an enriched dough,
they have to prove it for a bit longer
because it's full of butter,
so it will rise more slowly.
If they under-prove,
the dough will be very tight inside.
If they over-prove, it will basically
flatten out like a pancake.
[Prue] Some of the bakers will do
very unusual flavours, I am sure,
and I love that.
I don't think I should have a closed mind,
however much I like a traditional teacake.
[Paul] They can put cranberries in there,
sultanas, mixed peel.
As long as it tastes sweet and delicious
and spread out equally amongst
the whole teacake, I'll be happy.
I got me milk on to boil,
so I'm making blueberry
and cardamom teacakes.
With, like, cinnamon through it as well,
just because it's all the flavours
of sticky buns,
you know those cinnamon buns that you get?
They're, like, my favourite thing.
[Sandi] Back home in Liverpool,
Kate often bakes bread and cakes
for a local homeless charity.
She's filling her teacakes with dried
blueberries and infused spices.
Oh, that's gone a bit wrong.
No, I'm gonna start this again
because my hob turned off
and now my butter's gone weird.
Oh!
[chuckles]
I think I have too much... Oh.
-[Prue] Hello, Liam.
-[Paul] Morning.
-Morning.
-Tell us about your teacake.
So, I actually didn't know
what a teacake was.
[Sandi] Have you never had one?
[Liam] No.
So I was like, okay,
something that's remotely similar
is my nan's Jamaican Easter bun.
[Noel] Liam's been following
his nan's recipes since he was fifteen.
His homage to her Jamaican roots
will be packed with cherries and raisins
and made with a dough infused with
a stout he's just old enough to drink.
What sort of texture
are we expecting inside?
Teacake texture.
Right. And that is...
Very nice.
[all laughing]
I'm just putting the milk in the dough,
see if I can get it the right consistency.
Oh, that's nice. That is nice.
So, I'm making a kind of
Dutch-Nordic inspired teacake.
-[Sandi] Go James!
-Playing to the crowd.
[Noel] James is no stranger to
trying something new.
At home, he has a lengthy to-do list
of bakes he'd like to master.
Today, he can tick off fruited teacakes
with cardamom, citrus, and infused
dried fruit to give them a Nordic twist.
What makes a good teacake?
Well, I don't like teacakes to be honest.
I think they're the poor cousin
of the hot cross bun.
-Because a hot cross bun...
-You are joking, aren't you?
No. These are great for, like,
a lunchtime snack.
-Lunchtime?
-In the Nordics.
But you can't tell,
'cause of the light in there,
you can't tell if it's morning,
evening or night.
Don't you start with your
anti-Scandinavian nonsense.
Oh, I love a bit of kneading.
Don't need to go to the gym.
[Sandi] As well as providing a workout,
kneading creates the gluten that
gives dough its strength and structure.
Without enough kneading, the bakers'
teacakes will be dense and flat.
Lots of people say,
"Oh, if you're really angry,
like, knead and put your anger
in the dough,"
but I always feel like I can't do that
because I love my dough.
You think, "I love you, I love you."
[Sandi] Julia's been married to
husband Matt for three years.
It's her English mother-in-law's
love of toasted teacakes
that's inspired her Earl Grey-infused
apricot and cherry version.
Just need to get the dough proving
as quick as possible.
I just want to get it right,
because rushing too much
creates panic, doesn't it?
Who needs panic? Nobody.
I call them my tagine teacakes,
because they are based on
the leftovers that I had from a tagine.
All the ingredients minus the lamb.
[Sandi] Trainee stuntwoman Sophie
started baking six years ago
when she left the army
and the officers' mess behind
and finally got her own kitchen.
Her tagine-inspired teacakes
will be filled with spiced dates,
almonds and apricots.
You're a stuntwoman, aren't you?
So you can probably do stunt falls,
can't you? Rolls?
Yeah, combat roll where you sort of...
Combat roll. Do you learn that
at stunt school?
I actually learned that when I was
doing judo. They call it a break fall.
Very similar to comedy. First day
at comedy school. Banana skin.
Of course.
[Noel] Once the bakers feel their dough's
kneaded enough...
I like the feel of it when it changes
from this, like, gloopy mess
into a nice silky ball.
[Noel] The dough needs to prove.
I'll prove that for about 45 minutes.
This is going to prove for an hour.
It's a waiting game now,
just waiting for it all to prove.
What have you put yours on?
One. Half.
See, I've put mine on thirty.
[Kate] Thirty?
It's on holiday in there.
Holiday in Greece.
[Noel] Steven comes from a family where
recipe books are piled high.
He's hoping for a hat trick
of Star Baker crowns.
He's going all out with
his Madras Cocktail teacakes,
flavoured with orange and cranberry
and with a unique accompaniment.
So, this is vodka butter.
The vodka is purely there to lift flavour.
Oh, I can taste it.
This is called Kiano Chunda.
It's the equivalent of mango chutney.
My friend's mum has this for breakfast
every morning.
She likes it a bit more spicy than
I'm going to present it,
because I don't want to
blow their heads off.
[Sandi] After an unconventional commute
home from work, Yan loves to bake bread.
Her spicy Keanu Chunda
will accompany her honey-glazed
masala chai tea cakes.
You got a little bit of an injury there.
-Yeah.
-Is that a baking injury?
No, it's a scooting injury.
I fell off my scooter.
Scoot... What, like a moped?
No.
A children's scooter?
[both laughing]
-Little bit embarrassing.
-Yeah, a little bit embarrassing.
Maybe you need to take
some tips from Sophie,
because, you know, she's a stuntwoman,
so she can do those stunt falls.
-Tuck-and-roll.
-Yeah, the tuck-and-roll.
Well, this is a minor injury.
It could've been worse.
-No, that's not bad, actually.
-That's not bad.
Makes you look a little bit dangerous.
A bit edgy.
You're so edgy, Yan.
I quite like doing this bread,
because it's nice and quiet.
Oh, I don't know. This makes nervous,
this sort of sitting around.
Everything makes me nervous.
[Sandi] Back in her own kitchen,
Flo loves to share her 40 years of baking
knowledge with granddaughter, Lydia.
That's the Elvis Presley quiff.
She's making spiced mixed fruit teacakes
served with orange and whisky jam.
[Flo] I feel terrible sitting down here.
[Sandi] With one hour of the bake
already gone...
I feel as if I'm doing nothing.
...the bakers need to manage
their time carefully.
It's definitely grown.
I think mine's ready.
[Sandi] Spend too much time
on their first prove
and they won't have enough for the second.
I can't leave it in there any longer.
I think another five minutes,
then I'll stretch it out
and get the fruit in there,
because I think the second prove
is more important
as you're making the actual shapes
of the buns, so...
[Steven] Now I'm introducing
the dried fruit,
so this is the cranberry
and the orange zest.
The only thing that I always stuff up on
is my fruit being evenly distributed.
The thing is with adding fruit now,
it's not easy to mix it in
because it all just falls out.
I've rolled it up like a sausage roll
to try and get it quite even
to start with,
then it's just a lot of kneading.
[Noel] Ensuring their teacakes
are all the same size
is about attention to detail.
You've got to get them
as even as possible, really,
so that they cook evenly in the oven.
Pretty straightforward.
What could go wrong?
If the fruit pokes through,
it tends to catch in the oven,
so I'm sort of smoothing the dough,
pushing it round and tucking it under,
so all the fruit's in the middle.
I didn't even know what a teacake was,
because in Scotland, a teacake is like
a mallow thing with chocolate and biscuit.
[Noel] Tom's homeland may have denied him
a lifetime of fruited teacakes,
but it's given him plenty of lochs
to swim in at the weekends.
[exclaims]
He's making a cranberry and orange
fruited teacake,
and for extra sweetness,
he's adding chunks of white chocolate.
You've managed very well
to have your fruit hidden.
Is there any fruit in there?
There are. I hate when you get a teacake
and you get a little
cranberry or something,
that's like a bullet.
I actually think it looks like
a good teacake
when you've got a bit of fruit on
the top, personally, but...
who am I to judge?
Ooh, that's good.
[Noel] Stacey makes bread
every week for her family.
She's channelling all the flavours
of Christmas
with her cranberry and cinnamon teacakes.
Are you egg-washing these
before they go in the oven?
I'm putting a bit of milk on the top
and it makes them nice and soft.
You're putting milk on the top?
Right bakers, you've got one hour left.
Sixty good tea-caking minutes.
That's really not a long enough time.
[Sandi] The addition of fruit
means the second prove will take longer.
I'm gonna leave them in
for as long as I can
before they have to go into the oven.
How are we supposed to prove two
in the proving drawer?
I'm stacking them, with bowls.
God damn it! I almost had squashed ones.
[Sandi] Instead of perilously stacking
in the proving drawer,
Steven's opted to use somewhere that
already has more shelves.
Hopefully in this proving oven,
that should... That should be all right.
More waiting. [chuckles]
-Hello, Flo.
-Hello.
So you can have a little rest now,
can't you?
I can, yep.
Can't be doing with clock-watching.
I never time a cake or nothing.
All in here. That's magic, isn't it?
-So you just get a sense? A feel?
-Yeah.
A touch?
Not all the time. Didn't last week.
Just thirty minutes, bakers.
Just thirty minutes left.
Great.
[Sandi] To avoid under-baked teacakes,
judging the precise moment to stop proving
and start baking is critical.
I'm gonna go in in five minutes, you know.
You all right there, mate?
Mine are going in.
You're going in?
I'm going in. They look big enough.
[Tom] These have not had
long enough to prove.
[timer beeps]
Yep. Come on, bad boys.
[Yan] Oh, mine are huge.
They haven't rised as much as I'd wanted
them to, but you just got to crack on.
I'm egg-washing these teacakes
so they come out nice and shiny.
I'm putting a bit of milk on the top
and it makes them nice and soft.
Ah! They've sunk, they've sunk.
They've just...
The proving, I think they've just proved
too quickly and they've gone blech.
Fifteen minutes, bakers! Fifteen minutes.
Right, they're going in for fifteen.
[chuckles]
Going in, okay?
[Kate] I've put them in at 190.
[Flo] I have 160.
-You're 160?
-I have 160.
-160? That's low.
-I don't know whether to do 180?
Do what you normally do,
don't listen to me. Sorry.
Oh, I don't know now.
It's the blind leading the blind.
How long have we had, do you know?
How long have we got?
Bakers, you have five minutes.
They're not going to be ready.
I'm coming out, I'm coming out,
I'm coming out.
Mine aren't ready,
so I'm not taking them out.
They're looking fabulous.
I think I'm going to get one tray out.
Oh, my days! They are going to cut into it
and it's going to be raw. Oh, I'm dead.
Bakers, you have one minute left.
One minute.
I actually think they're ready.
Ow! They're hot. Ow!
Jam. Jam. Jam. Jam.
Oh, thank you, lovely.
-Do you want me to put these in?
-Put them on top.
Bakers, your time's up!
Step away from your teacakes.
[Sandi] The bakers' teacakes will now face
the judgment of Paul and Prue.
I think they're a bit small.
I think teacakes should be big and flat.
-These are sort of buns.
-[Paul] Good fruit distribution in there.
I think you have slightly over-baked them.
Yeah.
[Paul] I get the blueberry.
I get the cinnamon.
-[Prue] They taste terrific.
-Thank you.
Nice, even buns.
[laughing]
[Paul] Great texture.
The proving is perfect.
[Prue] And the baking is perfect.
It's got good flavour.
That tastes fantastic.
You just needed that temperature
to be up by 20 degrees,
and you'd have ended up
with the perfect teacake.
-Congratulations.
-Brilliant. Thank you.
Handshake from me. Means nothing.
[exhales]
These two look heavily fruited
and these don't.
They might not be when you open them,
but the truth is, it's better not to have
these outside, because they get
a bit too over-cooked.
My problem is, I don't think it's baked.
-[Prue] Oh, no. No, that's not good.
-It's not baked.
[sighs]
You got any salt in there?
-Yeah, a little bit of salt.
-Not enough. It's bland.
Do you know, I think you could've done
with a bit more fruit in here.
What temperature was your oven?
-160.
-Too low.
Smells great.
-I actually quite like them.
-Yeah?
Yeah, I do.
The thing it needs, though, is more spice.
Oh, really? Okay.
It just lacks flavour.
But actually, the fruit is lovely.
I think it's clever of you to have rolled
them so that the fruit is really encased.
Never got any fruit in that one.
-Never got any fruit in that one.
-[laughing]
But the flavour of the dough is excellent
and that balances it out,
so by the time you toast it
and put your butter on,
it tastes good. That's the closest thing
I've had to a teacake so far.
[Paul] I think you've baked it okay.
[exhales]
I honestly think it's a good teacake.
It looks like a teacake,
it feels like a teacake. It's not hard.
I think your choice of milk
was a big problem,
because if you'd had egg on that,
they'd look as they should,
but you got the basic shape.
You have got a decent teacake.
There seems to be
plenty of fruit in there.
I'm certainly getting the fruit
and I'm certainly getting the orange.
Spices? Yeah, I'm getting that, too.
Overall, I think the flavour's good,
distribution's good, the size is okay.
Just slightly under-proved.
Okay.
It's a little doughy, isn't it?
It's the volume of fruit,
and it's added all that moisture to it.
But overall, the flavour is nice,
you know?
It does have a very good flavour.
What else is in the mango?
Cardamom. Cumin. Chili.
It's amazing. There are so many things
going on. Beautiful chutney.
[Yan] Little bit of a kick at the end.
I didn't want to blow your heads off.
Great.
-Very, very good.
-Thank you.
[Prue] Really delicious.
They, my friend, are not your finest hour.
They are pretty bad.
It's just over-proved.
You've heated it up
and the whole thing has fallen apart.
[Prue] On the other hand,
your vodka cocktail
looks absolutely wonderful.
You know what? It's absolutely delicious.
Try a bit of vodka butter, Paul,
see if you change your mind.
[laughing]
-They're still over-proved.
-[laughing]
I got my negative feedback
that I'd been waiting for.
I think he referred to it as not my
finest hour. It was really disappointing.
By far my worst bake in the tent,
hands down.
I need to come, like, top three
in the Technical or I'm in trouble.
I do feel relived. Yeah, definitely.
Just looking forward to the Technical now.
I mean, I think for someone who has never
really eaten a teacake,
for Paul to say it was the closest thing
to a teacake he'd had so far was...
That was pretty good.
I would very much like them to say,
"Wow, you've nailed it."
That's what I want.
Hasn't happened yet.
[Noel] Bread week isn't about
to get any easier.
The bakers could practice for their first
challenge, but not for the next one.
And they're tackling another classic
in the world of great British bread.
Right, bakers, it's time for your
Technical Challenge,
which, surprise, surprise,
has been set for you today by Paul.
Paul, any words of wisdom?
We expect perfection.
No pressure. I'm gonna have to ask
you two lovelies to leave, sorry.
Off you go.
It's all right, they're going drag racing.
Yeah, it's the PruePaul Drag Race.
That is the pun to end all puns.
[laughing]
Right. For your technical challenge,
Paul would like you today
to make a cottage loaf.
Now, the cottage loaf history
dates back hundreds of years
to a time we call PM, pre-mixer,
so you are going to be making
your dough by hand.
[Noel] You've got two and a half hours.
-On your marks...
-Get set...
-Bake.
Lovely jubbly.
[Sandi] Cottage loaves have been baked
in Britain for hundreds of years.
Oh, my God. Something I know.
I'm just so pleased I know what it is.
I kind of know what I'm doing.
[Sandi] But not all our bakers
have this loaf in their repertoire.
[Kate] I've not made one before.
It's very daunting. I don't bake a lot
of bread, what can go wrong?
Apart from everything. Ha!
Why have you set a cottage loaf
for a challenge?
These are the best amateur bakers
Great Britain has to offer,
so I expect them to be able to make
a decent cottage loaf.
What I want to see is a smaller piece
of dough on the top, but not too small.
Larger on the bottom,
good, even colour,
and good slashes all the way around.
[Prue] What can go wrong, Paul?
Shaping obviously is the key point,
because you've got to be able to bond
the top with the bottom.
If they don't,
the bottom will blow off the top,
so the top will literally fall off.
So it's all about making
both the balls quite tight,
and the way that you'd do that and the way
I'd do it is just drive my finger
right the way through
to the tray underneath.
Do you flour your finger?
You must. Otherwise,
it will just stick to the dough.
I could oil it.
"Make a dough."
That's it, that's all we get.
[Kate] The instructions are pretty vague,
so just trying to get as much liquid
into it as possible
without it becoming sloppy.
Never made one before in my life,
so I've gone for the rubbing in the lard,
don't know if that's right.
I'm gonna make the basic dough,
flour, salt, yeast, water.
If you put too much water in it, it goes
drunk. What I've experienced loads.
[laughs]
When I've made it once before,
little one on top, lid, off.
Obviously, I've got a lot to make up for
from this morning.
Making the dough by hand.
Oh, God. It's quite a long process.
My muscles aching so bad.
They're knackered.
[James] If it's not kneaded enough,
it just loses all its shape.
Don't know if that's right or not, but...
It feels like it should feel, I guess?
I can't really afford
to leave it much longer.
It's all about time management.
[Kate] I'm just about to do
the windowpane test.
If it doesn't get a hole in it, that means
the gluten has developed enough.
You can stretch it
and see it's almost ready.
Thirty more seconds for luck.
It's going in to its first prove.
I love Paul's instructions, don't you?
Prove. Do it. He hasn't given us any info.
Prove it for forty minutes.
We're gonna do it for about an hour.
Play it by ear.
Forty-five and check it.
If the dough doesn't prove enough,
the loaf won't come up and rise.
What I want is double in size.
Dough's in the proving drawer,
so we just wait.
I feel, like, heart racy.
This is horrible.
-Are you enjoying bread week?
-So far, so good.
[Sandi] You like bread, don't you?
I love bread. But I do know what
a cottage loaf is. I have made one before.
That's an advantage.
You said that like you didn't.
[Stacey] No, I have made one before.
-I do know what it is.
-I do know... [laughs]
I have seen one. I have made one.
-I have made one before.
-Yeah? Prove it.
We're gonna moonwalk out of here.
Good luck.
[timer beeping]
I'm taking it out. Whee!
[James] It's the art of actually knowing
when it feels right,
whether it's proved right.
I just haven't got the experience.
Would you take that out now?
What do you reckon?
I'm gonna leave it with you, my love.
-I'm quite happy with it.
-Looks good. Risen well.
The instructions say, "Divide the dough
and shape into two balls,
one small and one large."
[groans] How much I'm gonna split it?
I'm gonna split it
500/225, or am I gonna split it...
I just don't know yet.
Take about a third, I think.
A quarter?
Divide by three.
[Kate] I'm not weighing it.
I'm just doing it by eye.
No one had scales,
electric scales in a cottage.
[James] "Shape into a classic
cottage loaf."
That's about as much instruction
as we got.
So, I'm just shaping the dough.
Otherwise it will kind of wonk over.
You don't want wonky balls.
[Sophie] Can't help but look around.
Paul wants it perfect
and this isn't looking that perfect.
Maybe this should have been smaller.
[sighs]
That doesn't seem right.
What Paul does is
he sticks his fingers in the flour
and he goes down like that.
Two fingers.
Up and down like that.
I just know how Paul does it.
That just looks wrong and weird.
[Yan] Put your finger in it.
[Kate] I'm just gonna stick with it.
Slash the dough anywhere you like,
I guess.
The instructions say prove, so this
is gonna go back into the proving drawer.
[Tom] The second prove is really important
because it's what gives
the final loaf its structure.
It may work, it may not.
My heart is "poof!"
[chiming]
Bakers, you've got 45 minutes left.
Forty-five.
[timer beeping]
Take it out. The second prove.
It's not horrific.
[Stacey] If that's not right,
I don't know what is.
Very happy with that.
[Julia] Just want to make it perfect.
That looks like BB-8 out of Star Wars.
Oh well.
Not happy.
Oh, God.
Look at my cowpat.
It's turned into just one loaf.
I think the dough was too wet.
It kind of spread.
Instructions say bake.
Hot water in the pan,
creating a bit of steam-age.
[beeping]
Wish me luck.
Baking it at 170,
but I might have to turn it up.
I'll probably do, like, ten minutes high
and then drop it down.
Fingers crossed.
How long are you gonna bake it for?
Thirty, 35 minutes,
but I'm gonna watch it like a hawk.
I'm trying to send vibes.
Become more beautiful.
-You're talking about the bread?
-[laughs]
[James] The longer it's in there,
the longer mine's hid.
Why?
The bottom of my bread
has eaten the top of my bread.
[Noel] What can you do?
[James chuckles] Nick someone else's?
You'll be fine.
[James exhales]
Inside I'm crying.
Bakers, you have fifteen minutes left
for your cottage loaf.
Doesn't seem to be going brown,
it's gonna take a while.
Not a great sign, is it?
I hope the clouds are not a reflection
of Paul's mood. I'll put it that way.
I'm happy it hasn't gone like that.
I just hope it doesn't go "oop."
I'm frightened in case it goes "pfft."
Oh, God.
-What's happened?
-[Kate] It's fallen off the top!
It just fell off.
Oh, my God, it's ruined.
Just, like, died.
I feel sick.
Oh, my God. I'm dying inside.
Do you know what? It's not the worst.
So that's... It's just all about
not being the worst.
I feel like I'm in trouble.
Bakers, you have five minutes!
Say something urgent.
Left. You've got five minutes left.
Seriously? Five minutes?
Mine's raw.
I've just put the oven back up a little
bit because it's not quite dark enough.
It's the highest temperature possible
just to get it... bang.
I'm hoping it goes "poof!" Blossoms.
I don't think it's cooked.
I know it's not cooked.
Tick, tick, tick, tick.
[clicking tongue]
My God, it's actually sliding more down.
I'll wait until the last minute.
Bakers, you've got one minute left!
-[sighs]
-Okay, go.
That's definitely not cooked.
See, mine's done.
I'm taking it out at the last 30 seconds.
It's gonna be tight.
[timer beeping]
Okay, bakers, your time's up.
Please bring up your cottage loaves.
It's a disaster.
[Sandi] Paul and Prue want to see
a classic cottage loaf,
well risen, with a rounded bottom
and a honey-coloured crusty exterior.
They have no idea whose loaf is whose.
Let's start from this one over here.
The actual shape of it,
the way it sits is good.
There's a little bit of decoration
on there, which is good.
And a nice rounded bottom.
It's quite risen.
It's proved well,
but it's slightly under-baked.
Good flavour.
Overall, not bad at all.
Paul, I really do like this one.
It's been properly pushed together.
There is a nice shape.
I do like the big cuts in it as well.
Let's have a look at it inside.
It is baked, it's crispy.
[Prue] When you're making a big loaf,
you can afford to have some crust,
and it's worth it because it's lovely.
I think it's a really satisfactory loaf.
[Paul] Okay, next one.
[Prue] That doesn't look
as if it's risen at all.
A little bit more proving
might have helped.
It's a bit soft. It needed ten, fifteen,
maybe even twenty minutes
still in the oven.
It's coming out too early,
what happens is the dough then rests
and then concertinas down onto the bottom.
Right moving onto this.
The actual shape, but it is central.
It hasn't ripped either way.
It's got a little bit of a crisp there.
If that had another ten minutes,
it would be perfectly crisp, wouldn't it?
[Paul] Okay, next one.
The actual overall proportions are right.
-Very nice.
-Flavour's good.
But it would be nicer
if it had more crust.
[Paul] Right, moving on.
It's just not been put on straight.
Normally, you'd push your finger
right the way through
from the top to the bottom,
and that allows the dough
to become straighter.
[Prue] Yes, this didn't get
the finger treatment at all.
[Paul] Next one.
The overall shape is good.
It's stayed in the middle.
-[Prue] It's really under-baked.
-[Paul] Yeah, it is.
And you can still feel
it's full of moisture. It's a wet loaf.
[Paul] Right, moving on to this.
The whole thing has merged together
to create a big cob, you've lost that top.
The dough itself was a bit too wet.
It doesn't look like
a cottage loaf at all.
Very neat. I quite like the look
of that one. The proportions are right,
and actually, the height as well.
You see the way it folds in?
It's lost a bit of definition on the top,
but it is still there.
It's quite light, too.
Enough salt. Flavour's good.
It's a decent loaf, that one.
Okay, last. The colour's good,
but the one on the top is almost like
a pancake sitting on top of a cob.
Texture is a bit tough. It's a bit flat.
[Sandi] Paul and Prue must now rank
the loaves from worst to best.
In tenth place, we have this one.
Whose is this?
Kate, it's slightly wobbly, though,
and it has a soggy middle.
In ninth place is this one. Whose is this?
You lost all the definition in it.
[Sandi] Yan is eighth. Flo seventh.
Sophie sixth. Liam fifth,
and Tom is fourth.
In third place is this one. Whose is this?
Beautiful shape. I like the flower.
Very, very neatly done. I like that.
-Thank you.
-In second place.
Beautifully risen.
It would've been a great loaf
if you'd left it in the oven a bit longer.
So in first place is this one.
[all applauding]
Good definition. Nice and round.
Good, strong shaping. Very good.
First in the Technical on bread week.
I mean, that is massive.
So excited.
My dough ate itself,
which wasn't a good look.
I was surprised I wasn't last to be fair.
Oh, what a disaster.
I hope there is some redemption there
from this morning.
You can be confident
and you know the bake,
but you don't know what way that dough's
gonna go. It's got a mind of its own.
I've gotta just smash it tomorrow.
That's all I've gotta do.
Just smash it tomorrow
and I should be fine.
[Noel] There's one challenge left before
Paul and Prue decide who's destined
for Star Baker
and who will be leaving the tent.
For me, the most surprising thing
is the way bread week
has simply blown it wide open.
I thought I had a good idea
of who was doing well,
Steven particularly.
[Paul] He did okay in the Technical,
then you look at his teacake
and they were massively over-proved
and it was such a shame.
Two Star Bakers on the bounce.
That's a difficult place to fall from.
Can we talk about Flo for a brief moment?
Oh, lovely Flo.
She's been in sort of a middling area
the whole time.
She has, and she struggled
in the Technical as well.
So she's in trouble.
She has known every time that
that wasn't the best she can do.
And I think Liam's in some danger because
yesterday he didn't have a good day.
He just needs to do well today.
Three of them at the moment
look very safe.
Julia, I think, has done well.
Tom's done well.
[Prue] Stacey has done really well.
I'd like to see her do well
in the Showstopper
because she's set herself up
to be a Star Baker, she has.
The bread queen.
Yeah, she's in a very strong position.
Wow. That makes it quite exciting.
Just a touch.
Good morning, bakers.
Welcome to your Showstopper Challenge.
Now, for today's challenge, Prue and Paul
would like you to make a bread sculpture,
but not just any bread sculpture,
a coloured bread sculpture.
We want eye-catching designs
using natural ingredients
to create flavour and colour.
Channel Jackson Pollock.
Right. You've got four and a half hours.
On you marks...
Get set...
-Bake.
This is big. This challenge is big.
I've got to smash this in order to
get into safety mode.
Just trying to stay calm.
Do the best I can.
[Noel] The bakers not only have to produce
a bread sculpture,
they have to showcase a minimum
of three naturally-occurring colourings.
Beetroot just, like, gives a really,
really nice vibrant colour.
[Julia] I've got spinach and parsley
and I'm adding it to obviously
make a green colour.
Im flavouring it and colouring it
with some squid ink.
When you're introducing colour
to a dough, it's all about balance.
Beetroot. Turmeric. Chocolate.
You've got to add them in
in such proportions
it doesn't inhibit the yeast too much
and that's the trick.
[Prue] I mean, to impress us,
it's got to look amazing,
with as vibrant a colour as you can get.
And every bit of it has got to taste good.
-All right, Flo.
-Hello.
-[Prue] Hello, Flo.
-Now, is that activated charcoal or is it?
-No, it's squid ink.
-Squid ink. Oh, it's squid ink.
Yeah. It's gonna be Davy Jones' locker.
-Davy Jones' locker?
-Yeah.
[Sandi] Flo's pirate-themed sculpture
will be made from
one basic white bread dough,
coloured and flavoured with squid ink,
beetroot and paprika.
-[Prue] That's a good idea.
-That's a nice idea.
-I hope it turns out well. I hope so.
-[Paul] Thank you.
I hope I do something right.
[Paul] Don't be like that. It's all right.
-Well done, Flo.
-Good luck, Flo.
[Noel] Flo isn't the only baker
going for a nautical theme.
I'm doing a squid ink
and smoked garlic octopus.
[Noel] Kate's octopus will take
centre stage in her undersea sculpture,
resting on a spicy twisted red
seaweed bread
with an accompanying
green spirulina bread.
I like flavours of the sea,
so I wanted to do something
that all, like, tied in together,
and I think it works quite well
as a concept.
I've never made a bread
sculpture in my life.
[chuckles]
So, especially, like,
when I saw coloured bread,
I was like, "Okay, cool, food colouring,"
but when I saw "naturally,"
I was like, "Eh? That's even worse."
[Noel] Liam plans to shape his bread
into an ice cream sculpture.
His three doughs will be
coloured and flavoured
with apricot, beetroot and cocoa.
I am in a precarious position.
I kind of wish I'd made more bread,
but I can't help what's not my thing.
So, I am doing a picnic basket.
So I've got a dough for the basket itself.
Then I've got, like,
a baguette poking out of it,
so that's a separate dough.
A bunch of grapes
and some apples and a sort of tea towel
if I have time.
[Noel] Sophie's trying to give
her sculpture an Italian colour scheme
with a white basket, green bread apples
filled with apple compote,
and red beetroot bread grapes.
A lot of time's taken up with the sort
of kneading and preparing the doughs.
So I think that will be priority,
just trying to get that done
as quickly as I can.
[Sandi] As if delivering three different
coloured breads wasn't enough...
[humming]
Julia has decided
her sculpture needs four.
I'm making kind of a scene,
so it's a bit of grass on the bottom,
mushroom in the middle,
and snail on the side.
You've got quite a lot to do, then?
I've practised it about...
Not a lot, only about six, seven times.
[Paul] It's a big thing to do, isn't it,
six or seven times?
[Sandi] Julia's flora and fauna will sit
on a spinach and parsley forest floor.
A red pepper and paprika bread snail
will shelter under a mushroom
with a potato and beetroot bread cap
and a Russian black rye bread stalk.
Tell me about this black Russian bread.
Basically, it's traditional bread
that I always had.
I've kinda changed
the recipe a little bit.
I'm adding black treacle to it
and I put some malt in it as well.
I love the sound of it,
it's quite complicated.
We want you to do well, don't we?
We don't want to send you home,
or the snail.
-Can't send snails home, that's the thing.
-[Julia] Thank you!
[James] I've got three
different doughs to do.
We're gonna have
a raisin and walnut saffron loaf,
which is the milk steeping here.
So this will turn a bit more yellowy,
so it will be...
I'm making an owl,
so it'll be like a tawny owl-type body,
and if I've got leftover dough,
a couple of hedgehogs.
[Noel] A hot chocolate chilli bread will
form the head and wings of James' owl,
which will nestle in the branches
of green tea baguettes.
I've just got to make sure
it all stands up
and the head doesn't fall off,
but apart from that, simple.
[Sandi] For her sculpture,
Stacey's turning to
a traditional family recipe.
My main bread is a challah.
This is a Jewish bread.
It takes quite a while, challah.
I mean really,
I like to prove my dough overnight,
but I have done it in the time before
and it's fine.
[Sandi] Sporting a challah bread brim,
Stacey's hat
will have a crown of woven turmeric
and lemon bread
and come adorned with
a variety of coloured breadsticks.
How are we gonna get some good tastes
in this as well, not just look good?
I know. Well, the thing is,
I want it to taste good,
but I wasn't actually going for
the flavours in the colour,
I was going for colour.
If the basic bread is delicious,
then it's fine.
It's nowhere near as pink
as it is normally at home.
I don't want to put
any more beetroot in it
'cause I think it'll make it too moist
and too heavy for the yeast, so...
I think I might make this again.
[Noel] Tom's planning a floral bouquet
of beetroot and turmeric bread roses
nestling in a pesto bread basket.
I'm gonna keep this dough.
I'm gonna prove it
as I would the other one.
I'm just gonna see if the other one
gives me a better colour
because it's got to be a nice,
vibrant colour to look like a flower.
Oh, look at that.
Nice, that. It's a good prove.
[Sandi] After the first prove,
the bakers can start
shaping their dough into their sculptures.
To get it right, Yan has been practising
using modeling dough
borrowed from her niece's toy box.
Wow!
[Yan] The sculpture is called
"Basil the Vegetarian Dragon
and his Pumpkin Hoard." No meat involved.
I can't see how anyone's gonna beat that,
unless someone does
a gluten intolerant unicorn.
[Sandi] Yan's dragon will be made from
a basil and spinach bread,
with turmeric
and tomato-coloured pumpkins,
a host of sweet and savoury toadstools,
all resting on a coriander focaccia floor.
[Yan] My super power is probably,
apart from baking, obviously,
is time management, and in my head,
I can do this in four hours and thirty...
Four hours and fifteen minutes
is my target.
I got fifteen minutes to spare.
[Sandi] Before they can shape their dough,
the bakers need to incorporate
any ingredients
they're using to further flavour them.
[Julia] This is the caramelised onion
and goat cheese.
The compote has got
apple and cinnamon mainly.
[Steven] This is stuffed with chorizo,
Manchego, onions and garlic.
I don't want to disappoint today.
I really hope I don't.
There's a lot of flavours going on.
-Morning.
-Hello, Steven.
Tell us about your bread sculpture.
I'm making a handbag.
-You're making a handbag?
-I'm making a handbag.
[Sandi] Steven's handbag will be made
of a Manchego, chorizo and sherry bread,
adorned with a curried breadstick chain
and a chocolate and peppermint handle.
You've struggled a little bit
on the bread week so far.
Yeah. Yesterday was
quite painful, actually.
So it's really important
that this one works.
It's important, just not that it works
as bread, but that the flavours are good.
I'm just shaping the octopus now.
I'm making a snail.
That just looks inappropriate.
At the moment, it looks a bit like
a chicken. That's why I need that model.
The second dough was not quite
the right colour,
so I'm just actually
going with the first one.
It's very fiddly.
I feel like you're trying to psych me out.
Super stressy.
[Noel] Bakers, you are halfway through.
So, is this what it's like being you?
-Good, innit?
-Yeah, its weird down here. I like it.
Your roots have, uh...
Well, they want doing.
This is ready to go in the oven now.
Which I'm very pleased about.
[Sandi] If the bread doesn't hold
its shape whilst baking,
then their structures will collapse.
Ooh, that one.
I've never baked a dragon before.
Please work. [chuckles]
This is the ugliest snail I've ever made.
I'm gonna make
a couple of little hedgehogs.
I'm trying to do a pirate's hat.
This is like a Noddy's hat.
[James] Because the light colour
can go really dark,
so I've made a little
owl chest plate for him,
and little sunglasses.
[Julia] Please be nice. Please be nice.
[Flo] Mine's a disgrace. I'm going home.
[Liam] I'm out. Game over, kid.
It's done. [chuckles]
Some of them have sort of,
like, tipped over, so...
One hour left bakers, just one hour.
An hour.
Yay! It looks like an owl.
I'm really quite pleased
with that, actually.
I'm just gonna give it
a Paul Hollywood tap.
It's not too bad.
It's the best I can do, anyway.
[Tom] I've still got about
twenty-something roses to make.
[James] How many doughs are you in?
This is my fourth.
Oh, bloody hell.
[Noel] With at least three different types
of bread to bake and only one oven...
Everything I am doing,
everything is on different temperatures.
So I've got to remember to turn it up,
remember to turn it down.
[James] Right, that'll go in
for about 25 minutes.
[Noel] Time management is crucial.
I have to move really quickly with these
because literally one minute
and they catch.
[Julia] This is my mushroom.
Yeah, seems to be okay.
[exhales]
So this one is the focaccia forest floor.
It's a nice green though, innit?
Not bad at all. Now my challah's going in.
See you soon.
-Hello, mate. You all right?
-Emotional like crazy, bro, like...
Really? You all right though, now?
Yeah, I'm good, I'm good. I mean,
sometimes I just have to have self-belief.
I couldn't boil an egg at your age.
I'm not too sure I could do that now.
I'm joking. I'm joking.
[laughing]
Bakers, you've got ten minutes left.
Ten minutes!
This is where the trouble starts.
The bread's a little bit softer
than it was when I was practising.
But it doesn't look like
it's gonna collapse.
This is so stressful.
Okay. Three, two, one, go.
Bakers, you've got five minutes left.
The state of me pirate's hat.
[Flo] Not happy.
Bakers, time's up.
Please place your bakes
at the end of your stations.
Some of them are marvellous, aren't they?
[Sandi] It's judgment time
for the bread sculptures.
Each must showcase a minimum
of three natural colourings.
It's a pity he is like a baby dragon.
I would have liked to see him
really centre stage.
Paul's gonna pull his head off.
I think you've got some strong,
bold flavours. The basil's there.
-It's very good. Tastes just like pesto.
-Great flavour. Wow.
I think we'll try the pumpkin.
It's well-baked. I love the colour.
I'm trying to hunt the flavour.
I'm not getting much.
I get the chilli heat,
but I don't get much else.
Let's try this focaccia.
Garlic.
Strong.
Almost too strong.
It's not very evenly distributed,
the apricots.
The flavour of the apricot is delicious.
-[Paul] What's in this chocolate one?
-[Liam] It's chocolate and date.
Your flavours are fantastic today.
Get in.
But your proving is a little bit under.
Okay.
I like the design of the owl.
The hedgehogs, probably not as much.
-This is walnut and raisin, isn't it?
-Yes, it is.
[Prue] Smells good.
Saffron's quite strong.
The walnut and raisin is losing its battle
against the saffron,
which is a real shame.
Remind me what the green is?
It's matcha green tea.
[Prue] Oh, it's matcha. Do you know,
that's too strong for me, too.
I really don't like the flavours, James,
but the design is so bold.
The baking is so good.
The proving is right.
You've got everything right,
-except it doesn't taste nice.
-[laughing]
You know, I think it is so elegantly done.
It's exquisite.
Thank you.
[Paul] I'm gonna take a little cut
of the challah.
While I'm here,
I'll take a little bit of
the lemon and turmeric.
[Prue] Challah is lovely.
Really good.
Taste is all right, but the proving
is wrong. It needed longer.
The strength of that turmeric is
quite overwhelming. The lemon's lost.
I think the design's good.
I think it's been executed well,
but your flavours are wrong.
Wow.
Well, Steven, that is amazing.
[Paul] It does look mighty impressive.
I'm gonna have to destroy that,
this now, you know?
[sighs] It's fine.
[exhales]
I think that's unbelievable.
The delicacy of the crumb,
which is more focaccia-like,
the flavours that you've got
from the Manchego, from the chorizo.
Well done. I mean, that's a big tick.
I've got to find the weak link.
[laughing]
It's delicious.
It's a perfect breadstick. Just curly.
[Paul] Remind me of this one again,
is it peppermint?
Chocolate peppermint breadstick.
[Prue] It's lovely.
[Paul] I mean, wow, wow, wow
on the flavours.
Steven, come here a second.
Come here.
Stand next to Prue.
I'm gonna go sit down here.
[laughing]
That is ridiculous.
Thank you, Flo. Can you tell us all about
your coloured bread sculpture, please?
It's supposed to be Tom Jones'...
Tom Jones? Davy Jones' locker.
I think Tom Jones' locker
would not look like that.
[Flo laughing] Davy Jones' locker.
I think it's very ingenious.
I think it's a little too clumsy
to come off perfectly.
Oh, look at the colour.
There's your three right there.
Squid ink, turmeric and beetroot.
The texture is very good. It's baked well
'cause it's more like a ciabatta.
-Is that what you set out to do?
-No.
You could've lied then, Flo.
I left the door open
and you never walked through.
No.
The paprika's quite strong in there.
This one tastes almost tasteless
because my mouth is still...
burning from the paprika.
Yeah. The paprika is just overwhelming.
[Prue] Not your best, Flo.
No.
I love that octopus.
I love the flavour of squid ink,
so I hope we get to get it.
The squid ink comes through
and it's very suitable for an octopus.
That is very good.
Heavy crust all the way around,
which cracks.
Beautiful and a regular structure inside.
[Prue] Well done.
I do like the basket.
I think the plaiting is very, very good.
I'm looking for the definition
in the colour
and I'm not seeing it too much
at the moment.
The apples don't really
look that green, do they?
The dough's quite underdone.
I think it's only marginally underdone,
and although, of course, the apple inside
has made it a bit wet,
it's still very pleasant to eat.
Well, you've certainly got
your three colours, haven't you?
[Paul] But having said that,
it's about getting
the definition in the rose,
and I think you've lost
some of the definition.
And the definition on the yellow roses
is much better.
[Paul] Much better. Yeah.
[Prue] I mean, that is really
quite exquisite.
-[Paul] This is the, uh...
-[Tom] Beetroot one.
I mean, it has a sort of pink hue,
which what you were going for.
Not much flavour, quite bland.
Which is a shame.
[Paul] I like the snail.
[Sandi] Is there something about the shape
of the snail you particularly like?
[all laughing]
Paul, are you going to
pull yourself together?
Yep. Give me a minute. [clears throat]
[laughing]
[Prue] Well, you certainly have
the three colours, don't you?
In fact, you have four colours.
Beetroot and potato,
oh, just feels so lovely. Look at that.
[Paul] The colour of that is amazing.
Lovely texture.
Nice flavour. I'd like to try this.
[Prue] This is the rye.
Wow. That's packing a punch, isn't it?
This is gonna be fascinating.
[Prue] Good crust.
Very malty.
[Paul] Great texture, great flavour.
[Prue] Really good bread. All right,
now we're going to attack this fellow.
Look at that. It's goat's cheese and...
Caramelized onion.
[Paul] Great taste.
Really fantastic taste.
The goat's cheese in there is delicious.
Your design is very, very good.
Well thought through.
-[Prue] Well done.
-Thank you so much.
What a memorable Showstopper.
Who stood out for you?
Stacey's fallen out of
the possibility of Star Baker.
I don't think that was good enough.
I think Julia's certainly still up there.
Julia's was lovely.
The snail was... humorous.
With the goat's cheese inside
and the onion, it was delicious.
She gave herself a huge job
and she pulled it off.
Obviously, Steven stood out.
That was exceptional.
I mean, every single element
to that was perfection.
The flavour combinations were stunning.
Very, very clever.
Though I'm not sure
we can give him Star Baker
when he did so badly with his teacakes.
Can we talk about Flo's Tom Jones' locker?
[Paul] The paprika burnt your mouth.
Just killed everything.
So much paprika in there.
She's in trouble.
-I think she struggled, Flo.
-What about Liam?
I want to shake Liam
because he keeps doing things wrong,
but he has this brave thing about flavour,
which I love.
Has he saved himself? I don't know.
Do you think that you two are going to be
in agreement about
who's gonna be Star Baker
and who's going to be saying goodbye?
I think we might not. [laughs]
I'm sure we will.
In the end.
-I've seen them, they arm wrestle.
-I know!
I have to say, that's the best bread week
I've ever seen. Well done.
I have the lovely chore of announcing
who the Star Baker is.
The Star Baker this week is the person
who put the "tea" into teacake
and whose Showstopper
was from Russia with Love.
-It's Julia.
-[all applauding]
That leaves me with the horrible job
of revealing who's going to leave us.
And the person that
we have to say goodbye to is...
-Flo.
-Yep.
-[Noel] I'm sorry.
-[Sandi] Have a hug.
I'm fine, honest to God. I'm fine with it.
Let me get myself together.
[exhales]
I will really miss Flo.
I'm a little bit sad
that she's gone, actually,
because I think the world of Flo.
[Flo] I've enjoyed the ride.
I've met some lovely people,
and I'll remember that
for the rest of my life.
I'm glad to get back to
normal life. [laughs]
[Sandi] You are exhausted.
I thought I was going. I need to up
the levels a bit. I've got to do better.
Julia is the deserved Star Baker
on bread week.
She was incredibly ambitious.
[exhales]
I did not expect that whatsoever.
[laughing]
I think it'll be good for Steven
to realize that he's not gonna dominate.
There are other bakers there beginning to
gnaw at his ankles a little bit,
and I think Julia's one of those.
I needed to come down off my little cloud.
I gotta practice.
I'm heading back home tonight
and the oven's going on.